Add Message Attestation for ServerToAgent messages (#333)
open-telemetry/opamp-spec: specification.md

### Code Signing

Any executable code that is part of a package should be signed
to prevent a compromised Server from delivering malicious code to the Agent.
For end-to-end integrity of OpAMP messages themselves (including remote
configuration offers, package offers, and Server-issued commands), see the

> [Message Attestation](#message-attestation) section.

Reviewer: Please move this to the end of this section (around line 3595) to keep the flow about code signing uninterrupted.

  prevent the code from accessing sensitive files or perform high privilege
  operations. The Agent should not run downloaded code as root user.

## Message Attestation

**Status: [Development]**

This section specifies an optional, end-to-end integrity mechanism for
`ServerToAgent` messages based on X.509 certificate chains. When both the
Server and the Agent opt in, every `ServerToAgent` message sent after the
initial handshake carries a signature that the Agent verifies against a
pre-configured trust anchor (a CA certificate) that is **distinct** from
the TLS certificate authority used to establish the transport.

> The mechanism allows OpAMP deployments to separate the _distribution

Reviewer: ~We need an example diagram here that shows what is meant by distribution server and a signing server and how the are expected to interact.~ Not needed anymore, we have that in supplementary-guidlines.

  Opting in causes the Agent to set the
  [`RequiresPayloadTrustVerification`](#agenttoservercapabilities) capability
  bit in its first `AgentToServer.capabilities`.
* Servers opt in by configuring a signing key and certificate chain.
  Opting in causes the Server to set the
  [`OffersPayloadTrustVerification`](#servertoagentcapabilities) capability
  bit in its `ServerToAgent.capabilities`.

The new capability bits are additions to a 64-bit bitmask.
Implementations that do not recognise the new bits will simply not match
them and will behave exactly as today.

The `SignedServerToAgent` envelope is sent **only** when the negotiation
succeeds. For connections where Message Attestation is not negotiated,
the wire format is byte-identical to upstream OpAMP — the Server keeps
sending plain `ServerToAgent` messages, and the Agent keeps parsing
them as such. Implementations that do not implement Message Attestation
therefore see no wire-format change at all.

A Server may advertise `OffersPayloadTrustVerification` and only wrap
its outbound messages in `SignedServerToAgent` on connections from
Agents that have set `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` — there is no

> per-message cost for advertising the capability to non-opted-in Agents.

Reviewer: Strictly speaking there may be a tiny increased cost when `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` is included while other higher bits are not present if this causes varint encoding of `capabilities` to spill to a larger number of bytes (3 instead 1 or 2).

More importantly, I don't see the point of advertising `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` to agents which did not set  `OffersPayloadTrustVerification` in the request. What is the purpose of that?

Author: I don't think there is any real benefit to advertising to agents that have not opted in, will adjust this wording.

### Capability Negotiation

| Agent `Requires` | Server `Offers` | Behaviour |
| --- | --- | --- |
| No | No | Plain OpAMP. The Server sends `ServerToAgent` messages on the wire. Today's behaviour. |
| No | Yes | Plain OpAMP. The Server is capable of signing but the Agent has not opted in, so the Server sends `ServerToAgent` messages on the wire (not `SignedServerToAgent`). |

> | Yes | No | The Server does not send `SignedServerToAgent`. The Agent receives a plain `ServerToAgent` where it expected a `SignedServerToAgent` envelope, and MUST terminate the connection. |

Reviewer: >MUST terminate the connection

What does "terminate connection" mean for plain http transport?

I think a better wording is to require the Agent to _ignore_ and _discard_ the message.

Whether the connection is terminated or no is secondary. In fact, the agent may want to keep trying until the it hits a server that is capable of signing. This is possible when rolling updates of servers are performed.

Author: Good catch, updated the wording in the Failure Modes section and added a reference to the updated wording in this table.

### Connection-Time Handshake

When the Agent has set `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` and the Server
has set `OffersPayloadTrustVerification`, every Server-to-Agent message
on the connection is wrapped in a `SignedServerToAgent` envelope. The
first such envelope carries the signing certificate chain in
`trust_chain_response`.

1. The Agent's first `AgentToServer` message sets the
   `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` bit in `capabilities`.

2. The Server, on receiving the Agent's first message and recognising
   the capability:
   * Sends its first `SignedServerToAgent` containing
     `trust_chain_response.certificate_chain` ordered from the first
     intermediate down to the signing leaf certificate. The root
     certificate (the Agent's pre-configured payload trust anchor)
     MUST NOT be included in this chain.
   * MAY set `trust_chain_response.error_message` if the Server cannot
     satisfy the trust chain request (for example, because its signing
     key is unavailable). When `error_message` is non-empty,
     `certificate_chain` SHOULD be empty.

>    * MAY leave `signature` empty on this first envelope. Trust on the

Reviewer: I don't think this is good idea. We may have OpAMP proxies in the future that operate on cleartext and can tamper with payloads. Requiring signatures on all envelopes prevents tampering of the first response by such intermediaries.

     first message is established by chain validation against the
     pre-configured trust anchor, not by a self-signature. Every

>      subsequent `SignedServerToAgent` MUST carry a valid signature.

Reviewer 2: Again, the absence of a signature here doesn't appear to be coupled with the absence of a payload: which might mean that the first remote_config can be unsigned. I would remove `MAY leave signature empty on this first envelope.` or at the very minimum be explicit that no payload must be parsed by the Agent in absence of a signature when the capability is there

   * Sets `payload` to the marshalled bytes of a `ServerToAgent`
     message containing whatever the Server would have sent had

>      signing not been negotiated (for example, an empty `ServerToAgent`

Reviewer: Why this requirement? Why shouldn't the first payload be a fully functional one?

Author: Removed the "empty" wording here

     acknowledging the Agent's status report, or a `ServerToAgent`
     carrying initial `remote_config`).

3. The Agent receives the Server's first envelope and:
   * Parses the bytes on the wire as `SignedServerToAgent`. If the
     bytes cannot be parsed as `SignedServerToAgent`, or
     `trust_chain_response` is unset, the Agent MUST terminate the
     connection. (This is also how the Agent detects a Server that
     does not support Message Attestation: such a Server would send a

>      plain `ServerToAgent`, which does not parse as

Reviewer: See my comment above about field numbers to prevent it does not accidentally parse as `SignedServerToAgent`

     `SignedServerToAgent`.)
   * If `trust_chain_response.error_message` is non-empty, the Agent
     MUST terminate the connection.
   * Otherwise the Agent performs standard X.509 path validation of
     `certificate_chain` using the pre-configured payload trust anchor
     as the trust root. If validation fails — for any reason, including
     expired leaf, expired intermediate, unknown issuer, missing
     `id-kp-codeSigning` Extended Key Usage on the leaf, or revocation

>      — the Agent MUST terminate the connection.

Reviewer 2: "Standard X.509 path validation" varies between implementations (EKU checking, name constraints, and basic-constraints enforcement on intermediates are commonly skipped or partial). Worth pinning to RFC 5280 §6 explicitly so the failure modes listed later become consequences of the normative reference rather than a parallel list that can drift.

```suggestion
   * Otherwise the Agent MUST perform X.509 certification path
     validation as defined in [RFC 5280 §6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280#section-6),
     using the pre-configured payload trust anchor as the sole trust
     anchor, `certificate_chain` as the intermediate and leaf
     certificates, and `id-kp-codeSigning` (`1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.3`) in the
     acceptable EKU set. If path validation fails for any reason —
     including expired certificate, unknown issuer, missing
     `id-kp-codeSigning` EKU, failed name/policy constraints, or
     revocation — the Agent MUST terminate the connection.
```

   * On successful validation, the Agent stores the validated leaf

>      certificate (or its public key) for the duration of the

Reviewer: What does "duration of connection" mean for plain http transport? Is it literal duration of TCP connection? Many http client implementations don't have direct means to detect the TCP connection lifetime. Furthermore this is even less clear when proxies and load balancers are involved.

Author: "Duration of connection" for HTTP transport is referring to the duration of the session across polling requests which ends when the Agent restarts or explicitly reconnects. Updated the wording to clarify this.

     connection and uses it to verify every subsequent
     `SignedServerToAgent`.
   * The Agent then unmarshals the `payload` bytes into a
     `ServerToAgent` and processes it normally.

#### SignedServerToAgent Message

```protobuf
message SignedServerToAgent {
    // Serialised bytes of a ServerToAgent message.
    bytes payload = 1;

    // Detached signature over the bytes of the payload field.
    bytes signature = 2;

    // Sent only in the first SignedServerToAgent on a connection.
    TrustChainResponse trust_chain_response = 3;
}
```

##### SignedServerToAgent.payload

Marshalled bytes of an inner `ServerToAgent` message. The Server
marshals the inner `ServerToAgent` once and places the resulting bytes
here. The signature in `signature` covers these exact bytes; the Agent
verifies the signature without re-marshalling, and then unmarshals
these bytes into a `ServerToAgent` for normal processing.

##### SignedServerToAgent.signature

Detached signature over the bytes of `payload`. MAY be empty on the
first `SignedServerToAgent` of a connection — chain validation against
the pre-configured trust anchor establishes initial trust. MUST be

> present and verifiable on every subsequent message.

Reviewer 2: ditto

   from step 3. On the first message, also set `trust_chain_response`.
5. Marshal and send the `SignedServerToAgent`.

The Agent verifies a received `SignedServerToAgent` (after the first)
as follows:

1. Parse the wire bytes as a `SignedServerToAgent`. Retain the
   `payload` field's raw bytes — these are the bytes the signature
   covers.
2. If `signature` is empty or absent, the Agent MUST terminate the
   connection.
3. Verify `signature` over the `payload` bytes using the public key of
   the leaf certificate established during the handshake, and the
   signature algorithm declared by the leaf certificate's
   `signatureAlgorithm`.
4. If verification fails, the Agent MUST terminate the connection.
5. On success, unmarshal the `payload` bytes into a `ServerToAgent`
   and process it normally.

Because the signature is detached, the Agent never needs to re-marshal
the inner `ServerToAgent`. This eliminates any dependency on canonical
serialisation between implementations.

### Algorithm

The signing algorithm is determined by the leaf certificate's
`signatureAlgorithm` field. The OpAMP protocol does not negotiate

> algorithms.

Reviewer 2: Claude suggests the following, and calls it a nit... however addressing it might be a bit involved and especially when it comes to defining a hash algorithm table. I'll just leave it here below:

(what follows is entirely generated)

---

An X.509 leaf actually has two algorithm-related fields, and signatureAlgorithm is the wrong one to point at here.

- Certificate.signatureAlgorithm (RFC 5280 §4.1.1.2) is the algorithm the issuing CA used to sign the leaf. It says nothing about what the leaf's own key can sign with — a CA could sign an Ed25519 leaf using RSA-PSS.
- Certificate.tbsCertificate.subjectPublicKeyInfo.algorithm (RFC 5280 §4.1.2.7) identifies the leaf key's algorithm — this is what determines how the server signs OpAMP payloads and how the agent verifies them.

For ECDSA there's an additional wrinkle: SPKI carries the curve but not the hash, so the spec needs to say which hash pairs with each curve (the SHOULD list already implies P-256→SHA-256 and P-384→SHA-384, just worth making it normative). For RSA there's a similar ambiguity between PKCS#1 v1.5 and PSS — the SHOULD list pins v1.5, which is fine, but the Algorithm section should reference the SPKI key type plus the chosen scheme, not the cert's outer signatureAlgorithm.

Suggested rewording:

```suggestion
The signing algorithm is determined by the leaf certificate's public key (subjectPublicKeyInfo), paired with the hash function specified for that key type in the list below. The OpAMP protocol does not negotiate algorithms.
```

The same nit applies to the two other mentions of signatureAlgorithm (specification.md:3871 in the signing procedure and specification.md:3969 in the out-of-scope list).

* Encryption of `ServerToAgent` or `AgentToServer` message contents
  (the transport-level encryption provided by TLS remains the mechanism
  for confidentiality).
* Authentication of `AgentToServer` messages (the Server's ability to
  verify the authenticity of Agent messages is out of scope for this
  section; see
  [opamp-spec issue #20](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/issues/20)).

### Trust Model

The Agent is pre-configured with a single root CA certificate, referred
to in this section as the _payload trust anchor_. This certificate is
operator-managed and is supplied to the Agent through
implementation-specific configuration (for example, a file path in the
Agent's configuration). The payload trust anchor MUST NOT carry the `id-kp-serverAuth`
Extended Key Usage, ensuring it cannot double as a TLS CA certificate.
Operators MAY root both the TLS chain and the signing chain from the
same root CA, provided the signing intermediate and leaf certificates
carry only `id-kp-codeSigning` and the signing private key is stored
separately from the distribution server. The security boundary is the
combination of private-key isolation and EKU constraints — not a

> requirement for a separate root CA.

Reviewer: I don't understand this piece (likely mostly due to my ignorance). Can you add some explanation in the supplementary-guidelines to help readers who don't have in-depth experience in the topic?

Author: Added a new section "Certificate Hierarchy and Extended Key Usage" to clarify this

The Server is independently configured with a signing key and its
corresponding certificate chain that validates back to the payload trust
anchor.

> The payload trust anchor is NEVER pushed by the Server. In particular,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The payload trust anchor is NEVER sent from the Server to the Agent. In particular,
```

> The payload trust anchor is NEVER pushed by the Server. In particular,

Reviewer: I would like to discuss this. We never want the Sever to _update_ Agent's trust anchor. I agree with that.

However, it can be very valuable to support a Trust On First Use flow. If we include the trust anchor in the certificate chain that goes from Server to Agent, then on the first run the Agent can choose to trust that anchor and use it for subsequent verification.

This greatly simplifies the initial rollout of agents since it no longer requires supplying the trust anchor certificates during installation. You can install the Agent from a general repository (e.g. released by Otel) and it will obtain the trust anchor on the first run, then correctly use it for attestation. Of course the Agent is expected to _never_ update an already obtained or preconfigured trust anchor.

Yes, there is a danger the registration can happen when the distribution server is compromised, but that's generally the drawback of all TOFU flows.

The support of TOFU flow for obtaining attestation trust anchor can be a configuration option in the Agent.

We already support TOFU flows [elsewhere](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/blob/main/specification.md#trust-on-first-use).

Author: > The support of TOFU flow for obtaining attestation trust anchor can be a configuration option in the Agent.

Supporting a TOFU flow via a configuration option sounds reasonable with me.

My main concern with using a TOFU flow for message attestation is that persistent storage is required in order to persist the acquired trust anchor across restarts. If the Agent is deployed in a container environment for example, the Server connection can be ephemeral due to container restarts, which would result in repeated TOFU flows while reconnecting.

Even with these drawbacks in mind, I think it's still reasonable to support TOFU as an optional, simpler startup flow, but we should note these drawbacks for customers to know.

no field of any `ServerToAgent` message — including
[`OpAMPConnectionSettings`](#opampconnectionsettings) — may be used to
update or replace the Agent's payload trust anchor. This is a deliberate
constraint to prevent a compromised Server from rotating the Agent onto
an attacker-controlled trust anchor.

When the payload trust anchor approaches expiry or must be replaced,
rotation is handled by the same out-of-band mechanism used to provision
it initially (for example, updating the certificate file in the Agent's

> configuration and restarting the Agent). Operators SHOULD plan for this

Reviewer: Another approach is to hard-code the CA certificate in the Agent and use Agent executable updates to push new versions of the Agent (and thus new CA certificate).

     — the Agent MUST terminate the connection.
   * On successful validation, the Agent stores the validated leaf
     certificate (or its public key) for the duration of the
     connection and uses it to verify every subsequent
     `SignedServerToAgent`.
   * The Agent then unmarshals the `payload` bytes into a
     `ServerToAgent` and processes it normally.

#### SignedServerToAgent Message

```protobuf
message SignedServerToAgent {
    // Serialised bytes of a ServerToAgent message.
    bytes payload = 1;

    // Detached signature over the bytes of the payload field.
    bytes signature = 2;

    // Sent only in the first SignedServerToAgent on a connection.
    TrustChainResponse trust_chain_response = 3;
}
```

##### SignedServerToAgent.payload

Marshalled bytes of an inner `ServerToAgent` message. The Server
marshals the inner `ServerToAgent` once and places the resulting bytes
here. The signature in `signature` covers these exact bytes; the Agent
verifies the signature without re-marshalling, and then unmarshals
these bytes into a `ServerToAgent` for normal processing.

##### SignedServerToAgent.signature

> Detached signature over the bytes of `payload`. MAY be empty on the

Reviewer: See my comment above. I don't think we want to allow this to be empty.

5. On success, unmarshal the `payload` bytes into a `ServerToAgent`
   and process it normally.

Because the signature is detached, the Agent never needs to re-marshal
the inner `ServerToAgent`. This eliminates any dependency on canonical
serialisation between implementations.

### Algorithm

The signing algorithm is determined by the leaf certificate's
`signatureAlgorithm` field. The OpAMP protocol does not negotiate
algorithms.

Implementations SHOULD support, at minimum, the following algorithms:

* ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256
* ECDSA P-384 with SHA-384
* RSA-2048 or larger with PKCS#1 v1.5 and SHA-256
* Ed25519

These algorithms are covered by the default X.509 stacks of Go
(`crypto/x509`), Java (`java.security`), and Python (`cryptography`).

Future algorithm additions require no change to the OpAMP protocol; new
algorithms are signalled by the certificate and supported by stacks as
they evolve.

### Certificate Requirements

The signing leaf certificate MUST:

* Include the Extended Key Usage extension with `id-kp-codeSigning`
  (`1.3.6.1.5.5.7.3.3`) in its list of allowed usages. This prevents a
  certificate intended for TLS server authentication from being used

>   to sign OpAMP messages.

Reviewer: I don't understand this part. Can you clarify how does it prevent this?

Author: TLS server certificates carry `id-kp-serverAuth`, which will fail the EKU check because the Agent requires `id-kp-codeSigning` during chain validation. This means that TLS certificates cannot be repurposed as signing certificates. Edited this paragraph to clarify this.

  prevent the code from accessing sensitive files or perform high privilege
  operations. The Agent should not run downloaded code as root user.

## Message Attestation

**Status: [Development]**

This section specifies an optional, end-to-end integrity mechanism for
`ServerToAgent` messages based on X.509 certificate chains. When both the
Server and the Agent opt in, every `ServerToAgent` message sent after the
initial handshake carries a signature that the Agent verifies against a
pre-configured trust anchor (a CA certificate) that is **distinct** from

> the TLS certificate authority used to establish the transport.

Reviewer 3: ``` suggestion
pre-configured trust anchor (a CA certificate) that MUST differ from
the TLS certificate authority used to establish the transport.
```
you use the MUST wording later on

Reviewer 4: I'm interested in drives this requirement for separate CAs? It would require a customer that deploys message attestation to maintain / utilise two distinct CAs which is a bit of a burden.

If it is to split the security domains between the TLS + attestation, then I think we get that already using the `Key Usage` constraints on the certificates themselves:

* A server using TLS requires the `serverAuth` key usage bit to be set.
* This spec requires that the `codeSigning` bit be set.

So this lets us have two distinct chain "roles" that can chain to the same root, but are isolated from each other. You could go as far as to have the `codeSigning` intermediate CA stored separately from the `serverAuth` intermediate, physically isolating them too.

Author: Good point, updated the spec to modify this requirement for separate CAs

messages: if TLS is terminated at a third-party load balancer, or if a
managed OpAMP server is operated by a vendor, the distribution server
can be a single point of control over the fleet. Even when TLS is not
terminated by a third party, a software exploit of the distribution
server (for example, a remote code execution vulnerability) could allow
an attacker to take over the entire fleet.

Without message-level signatures, the following attack vectors are not
mitigated by the protocol itself:

* A compromised distribution server may forge or modify
  [`ServerToAgent.remote_config`](#servertoagentremote_config),
  [`ServerToAgent.connection_settings`](#servertoagentconnection_settings),
  [`ServerToAgent.packages_available`](#servertoagentpackages_available),
  [`ServerToAgent.command`](#servertoagentcommand),
  [`ServerToAgent.agent_identification`](#servertoagentagent_identification),
  or any other field, even though such messages did not originate from
  the intended authoritative source.

* An internal attacker who can access the distribution server's stored
  state, but not the signing keys, can still alter OpAMP messages in
  flight.

> Message Attestation does **not** address:

Reviewer 4: So I think there's two other properties that this proposal doesn't currently address that we might want to consider - they're both part of a class of attacks we expect for our internal protocol to mitigate:

* **Message replay:** if an attacker obtains a valid and signed message, they can reuse that message and send it to the same agent again, or a different agent that was not the intended recipient.
* **Rollback attack:** related to the above, a previously captured message can be sent to revert any subsequent changes (like "roll back a config change").

A classic replay attack in this context would be capturing a validly signed `ServerToAgentCommand.type = Restart` message for an Agent, and then resending it every time that agent connects, causing a DoS of the Agent using the attested message.

A more subtle attack would be to use the above replay trick to obtain a legitimate remote config message that compels an Agent to upload sensitive files to the server[^rc-security] or perform some similarly risky action, and then broadcast that command to all connected agents instead of just the intended recipient.

Notably an attacker can't change the _content_ of these messages (that would invalidate the signature). They're constrained to only replaying messages previously sent by the server.

Fixes are relatively easy: 

* To prevent cross-session replay attacks, you can make use of a session nonce ("number used once") that is randomly generated by the Agent, unique to the connection and is part of the signed `ServerToAgent` payloads sent to that Agent. Upon receiving a payload, the ID is checked to match. That prevents a message destined for Agent A from being replayed to Agent B.

* To prevent intra-session replay attacks: maintain a sequence number such that an old message cannot be resent later in the session to roll back the effects of a message (e.g. cannot "undo" a "change config" request) - [much like your car probably does](https://www.pcmag.com/news/is-your-car-key-fob-vulnerable-to-this-simple-replay-attack). There's a similar mechanism already in place for [`AgentToServer` messages](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#agenttoserversequence_num) already, but for a different purpose.

Note: there is [the `instance_id` field](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#agenttoserverinstance_uid) which goes a long way to preventing cross-Agent replay attacks, but the protocol allows the server to push an "instance ID change" request ([ref](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#servertoagentagent_identification)) which could be used to switch the Agent to an instance ID that is part of a previously captured request. I'm not familiar enough with the implementation to know if this is a viable path, and if not, the existing instance ID may suffice as a session nonce, but it should be documented as a load-bearing part of the protocol security if used as such.

[^rc-security]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#security-considerations

Reviewer: >To prevent intra-session replay attacks: maintain a sequence number such that an old message cannot be resent later in the session to roll back the effects of a message (e.g. cannot "undo" a "change config" request) - much like your car probably does. There's a similar mechanism already in place for AgentToServer messages already, but for a different purpose.

We can look into adding sequence_num to ServerToAgent to prevent the replay attacks.

There is a a bit of nuance here that needs some thought:
- We cannot require for agent-generated and server-generated sequence_num to be in sync, they will be incremented independently, particularly when WebSocket transport is in use. Nevertheless the agent can correctly verify monotonic increase of server-side generated sequence_num. 
- Need to specify what happens on reconnects, Server restarts and also when multiple Server instances are behind load balancer.

>but the protocol allows the server to push an "instance ID change" request (ref) which could be used to switch the Agent to an instance ID that is part of a previously captured request. 

This can't happen if the attestation is used. The "instance ID change" itself is subject to attestation. We must assume if the signing server is uncompromised then "instance ID change" message is legitimate.

Author: > We can look into adding sequence_num to ServerToAgent to prevent the replay attacks.

Should we scope this to a separate PR or address it in this one?

Reviewer: Let's do in a separate PR. sequence_num is also interesting for other reasons, and I want to have that discussed separately. There is a bit of nuance there (e.g. how are the server instances expected to generate sequential numbers in a horizontally scaled deployment) that warrants its own discussion.

Once we have sequence_num we can update attestation section to make use of it.

* Encryption of `ServerToAgent` or `AgentToServer` message contents
  (the transport-level encryption provided by TLS remains the mechanism
  for confidentiality).
* Authentication of `AgentToServer` messages (the Server's ability to
  verify the authenticity of Agent messages is out of scope for this
  section; see
  [opamp-spec issue #20](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/issues/20)).

### Trust Model

The Agent is pre-configured with a single root CA certificate, referred
to in this section as the _payload trust anchor_. This certificate is
operator-managed and is supplied to the Agent through
implementation-specific configuration (for example, a file path in the
Agent's configuration). The payload trust anchor MUST NOT be the same
certificate as the TLS root the Agent uses to validate the transport —
using the same root would collapse two separate trust domains into one
and eliminate the security benefit.

The Server is independently configured with a signing key and its
corresponding certificate chain that validates back to the payload trust

> anchor.

Reviewer 4: Is this paragraph implying that the server MUST validate payloads are valid before they are sent to the client?

If so, I would consider skipping this - it's not going to help you in the case of an attack (the attacker can simply send their message directly, bypassing the check) but it imposes a cost in the happy path as every message must be validated (latency + CPU).

The payload trust anchor is NEVER pushed by the Server. In particular,
no field of any `ServerToAgent` message — including
[`OpAMPConnectionSettings`](#opampconnectionsettings) — may be used to
update or replace the Agent's payload trust anchor. This is a deliberate
constraint to prevent a compromised Server from rotating the Agent onto

> an attacker-controlled trust anchor.

Reviewer 3: What's the guidance if the trust root is set to expire?
Is some external process needed in order to update?

Reviewer 5: If a root is expired the assumption is there will be some manual or out-of-band redistribution of the new trust root certs to the clients. Baking in rotation of the root cert into the protocol would allow for attackers to hijack the entire attestation process.

Author: Added a note to clarify this guidance

1. The Agent's first `AgentToServer` message sets the
   `RequiresPayloadTrustVerification` bit in `capabilities`.

2. The Server's first `ServerToAgent` message:
   * MUST set `trust_chain_response.certificate_chain` to the ordered
     list of certificates from the first intermediate down to the
     signing leaf certificate. The root certificate (the Agent's
     pre-configured payload trust anchor) MUST NOT be included in this
     chain.
   * MAY set `trust_chain_response.error_message` if the Server cannot
     satisfy the trust chain request (for example, because its signing
     key is unavailable). When `error_message` is non-empty,
     `certificate_chain` SHOULD be empty.
   * MAY omit the [`signature`](#servertoagentsignature) field on this
     first message. Trust on the first message is established by chain
     validation against the pre-configured trust anchor, not by a
     self-signature. Every subsequent `ServerToAgent` MUST be signed.

3. The Agent receives the Server's first `ServerToAgent` and:
   * If `trust_chain_response` is unset, the Agent MUST terminate the
     connection.
   * If `trust_chain_response.error_message` is non-empty, the Agent

>      MUST terminate the connection.

Reviewer 3: When an agent terminates, should it retry?

Do we want to use a specific error_message attribute instead of the [ServerToAgent.error_response](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/blob/main/specification.md#servertoagenterror_response)?

Reviewer 5: IHMO retries (with an exponential backoff to prevent hurting the OpAMP servers) are OK; it would allow the clients to self-recover on some class of attacks, for example DNS-based, without having to do anything specific on the client-side (in our example, once the DNS issue is resolved). 

I personally don't see a need to have a dedicated message attribute, but I don't have a strong opinion on my side.

Author: Agreed, added details on retries to the spec

}
```

##### TrustChainResponse.certificate_chain

Ordered list of certificates from the first intermediate down to the
signing leaf certificate. The root certificate is excluded. Each entry
is a `Certificate` message whose `der_data` field holds the DER-encoded
certificate.

##### TrustChainResponse.error_message

Human-readable error description set by the Server when it cannot
satisfy the trust chain request. When non-empty, `certificate_chain`
SHOULD be empty and the Agent MUST terminate the connection.

### In-Session Signature Verification

For every `ServerToAgent` message after the first, the Server MUST set
the `signature` field to a signature over the message bytes, computed as
follows:

1. Construct the `ServerToAgent` message with all required fields set
   except `signature`, which is left empty (zero-length).
2. Serialise the message using deterministic Protocol Buffers encoding
   (for example, Go's `proto.MarshalOptions{Deterministic: true}` or
   the equivalent in other implementations).
3. Sign the resulting byte string with the Server's signing private
   key, using the signature algorithm declared by the leaf
   certificate's `signatureAlgorithm` field.

> 4. Set `signature` to the resulting signature bytes.

Reviewer 4: I think this is probably going to be problematic - the protobuf encoding does not have a  _canonical_ representation. The [docs](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/serialization-not-canonical/) specifically state that, even in "deterministic output" mode:

> The serializer can generate different output for many reasons, including but not limited to the following variations:
>
> * The protobuf schema changes in any way.
> * The application being built changes in any way.
> * The binary is built with different flags (eg. opt vs. debug).
> * The protobuf library is updated.

Which isn't going to provide sufficient guarantees when deployed across different versions / implementations / platforms / etc.

In general signing a payload that also contains the signature is definitely tricky and kind of forces this "serialise -> sign -> reserialise" dance that then requires the serialisation be deterministic on all platforms.

In an ideal world, the signature would be part of the _metadata_ sent alongside the signed payload, rather than within the payload itself. For the HTTP transport  that is easy - the signature can be a header value. But the WebSocket transport don't provide a metadata side channel like like HTTP headers, and the protocol doesn't currently have any provision for metadata alongside the message payload.

Here's some possible solutions - they're all shifting the signature out of the payload (to make a "detached signature") but there might be other ways to do this that I've not thought about.

### Negotiated Type Switch

After the feature flag exchange has resulted in negotiating the use of signed messages, switch to using a different type instead of `ServerToAgent` if and only if message attestation is enabled:

```protobuf
message SignedServerToAgent {
    bytes payload = 1; // Serialised ServerToAgent
    bytes signature = 2;
}

// ServerToAgent unchanged
```

Clients will need to have a new check early in the message processing path, but then processing continues as usual:

```go
payload := conn.Read();

var message ServerToAgent
if usingSigning {
    message = verify_and_parse(payload);
} else {
    message = parse_server_to_agent(payload);
}

// Continues like normal
```

Where `verify_and_parse()` parses the `SignedServerToAgent` protobuf message, and validates the signature, and then returns the inner `ServerToAgent`. The rest of the message processing continues like normal, using the `ServerToAgent` as it does today.

Pros:

* Protocol is fully backwards compatible with existing clients.

Cons:

* Protocol is now not fully described by a single type for the server -> agent direction.

### Explicit Protocol Metadata

Obviously the protocol is not yet v1, so technically a breaking change could be made to support attestation directly - either by modifying the protobuf:

```protobuf
// Redefine the top-level type:
message ServerToAgent {
    ServerToAgentPayload payload = 1;
//or  bytes payload = 1;

    // metadata here
    bytes signature = 2;
}

message ServerToAgentPayload {
    // Existing fields here
}
```

This adds user friction though and probably wouldn't be well received, but it is a "one time" cost prior to stability. 

Alternatively, by changing the [WebSocket header](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#websocket-message-format) to explicitly indicate that a signature is present alongside the encoded protobuf payload:

```
┌────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┬───────────────────┐
│header      │varint encoded unsigned 64 bit integer  │1-10 bytes         │
├────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────┤
│data        │Encoded Protobuf message,               │0 or more bytes    │
│            │either AgentToServer or ServerToAgent   │                   │
├────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────┤
│metadata    │serialised metadata                     │0 or more bytes    │
└────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────┴───────────────────┘
```

They're both equivalent except the former couples the metadata to protobuf.

Pro:

* Explicit "bag of metadata" separates concerns from "payload content" in the same way HTTP / gRPC does and can be reused.

Cons:

* Breaking change - probably a difficult option at this point.

Reviewer 5: I kind of feel like the negotiated type-switch would create less friction, and prioritizes the notion of backward compatibility with existing clients. I feel like it's fair to say that despite this not being v1 there are enough clients out there using former implementations that this is the more realistic/reasonable path forward.

I've updated the spec in commit https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/pull/333/commits/1f75ca1f63a0006e627bc8f23c13a9279a1232ac to account for this feedback.

4. Verify the extracted `signature` against the resulting byte string
   using the public key of the leaf certificate established during the
   handshake, and the signature algorithm declared by the leaf
   certificate's `signatureAlgorithm`.
5. If verification fails, the Agent MUST terminate the connection.

Implementations MUST use deterministic Protocol Buffers encoding for
both signing and verification. Cross-language implementations must
produce byte-identical canonical serialisations for the signed payload
to interoperate.

### Algorithm

The signing algorithm is determined by the leaf certificate's
`signatureAlgorithm` field. The OpAMP protocol does not negotiate
algorithms.

Implementations SHOULD support, at minimum, the following algorithms:

* ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256
* ECDSA P-384 with SHA-384
* RSA-2048 or larger with PKCS#1 v1.5 and SHA-256
* Ed25519

These algorithms are covered by the default X.509 stacks of Go
(`crypto/x509`), Java (`java.security`), and Python (`cryptography`).

Future algorithm additions require no change to the OpAMP protocol; new
algorithms are signalled by the certificate and supported by stacks as
they evolve.

### Certificate Requirements

> The signing leaf certificate MUST:

Reviewer 4: Another constraint: the certificate must have a `dNSName` or `iPAddress` SAN entry that matches the hostname (or IP address if IPs are used) of the opamp distribution server.

This will be required by any X509 verification library - it is what is used to ensure you're using the right certificate for the server you're connected to.

Author: I don't have much context on SAN entries but I can't tell whether they are required by x509 verification libraries. Looking at the Go x509 verification library, it seems like the Go library doesn't check SAN unless you explicitly pass a `DNSName` in `VerifyOptions`. It seems like a SAN entry is required for a TLS handshake but not for x509 verification, but let me know if I'm misunderstanding this.

Attestation. They MAY be revisited in future versions of the
specification.

* **Encryption of message contents.** TLS continues to provide
  transport-level confidentiality. Message Attestation adds integrity,
  not confidentiality.
* **Authentication of `AgentToServer` messages.** Verifying the
  authenticity of Agent-originated messages is tracked separately in
  [opamp-spec issue #20](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/issues/20).
* **Trust anchor distribution by the Server.** The payload trust anchor
  is operator-managed and MUST NOT be modified by any field of any
  `ServerToAgent` message.
* **Algorithm negotiation.** The certificate's `signatureAlgorithm` is
  authoritative. Future algorithm support is added by certificate
  issuers and X.509 stacks, not by changes to OpAMP.
* **Per-message-type opt-out (signing allowlist).** Mechanisms by which
  an Agent might accept some `ServerToAgent` message types unsigned —
  for example, to allow a third-party fleet manager to push low-risk
  read-only telemetry settings while still requiring authoritative
  signatures for configuration or command messages — are deferred to a

>   follow-up specification.

Reviewer 4: I think this presents an interesting future development if justified by usage - being able to safely delegate parts of operating the fleet to 3rd parties or higher-risk infra, while retaining control over risk factors is a nice feature.

Reviewer: This is indeed interesting. We can imagine a simple fallback mechanism where the Agent upon detecting the Server does not support attestation or if signature cannot be verified, goes into "readonly" mode where it continues sending AgentToServer messages with status reports, etc, but ignores any remote config, commands, etc received from the Server.

This is also useful for situations when certificates expire. Instead of resulting in total loss of communication with the Agents this would result in readonly mode, greatly helping with understanding and troubleshooting the situation.

This may be a mode of operation that we allow in the spec and let implementations decide how strict they want to be in this failure mode.

Author: I agree that a "readonly" mode would be an interesting fallback mechanism, but I'm inclined to leave this mechanism as out of scope for the initial message attestation spec. We are already defining message attestation as an opt-in capability, so users who opt-in will likely be interfacing with servers that support attestation and will expect full read-write capabilities.

If a "readonly" mode is desired in the future, it may make sense to propose this as a separate spec from message attestation, since it could apply to users who are opt-out as well.
